\subsubsection{Abstract}

Automatic differentiation frameworks are optimized for exactly one thing:
computing the average mini-batch gradient. Yet, other quantities such as the
variance of the mini-batch gradients or many approximations to the Hessian can,
\emph{in theory}, be computed efficiently, and at the same time as the gradient.
While these quantities are of great interest to researchers and practitioners,
current deep-learning software does not support their automatic calculation.
Manually implementing them is burdensome, inefficient if done na\"ively, and the
resulting code is rarely shared. This hampers progress in deep learning, and
unnecessarily narrows research to focus on gradient descent and its variants; it
also complicates replication studies and comparisons between newly developed
methods that require those quantities, to the point of impossibility. To address
this problem, we introduce \BackPACK, an efficient framework built on top of
\PyTorch, that extends the backpropagation algorithm to extract additional
information from first- and second-order derivatives. Its capabilities are
illustrated by benchmark reports for computing additional quantities on deep
neural networks, and an example application by testing several recent curvature
approximations for optimization.

\marginnote{%
  \begin{center}
    Code and experiments available at the Github repositories
    \href{https://github.com/f-dangel/backpack}{\texttt{f-dangel/backpack}},
    \href{https://github.com/f-dangel/backpack-experiments}{\texttt{f-dangel/backpack-experiments}}
  \end{center}
  \begin{center}
    \includegraphics[height = 0.8\linewidth]{../repos/backpack-paper/tex/logo/backpack_logo_github.pdf}
  \end{center}
}%

\section{Introduction}
\input{sections/backpack_intro}

\section{Theory \& Implementation}\label{backpack::sec:theory-and-implementation}
\input{sections/backpack_backpack}

\section{Evaluation \& Benchmarks}\label{backpack::sec:benchmark}
\input{sections/backpack_benchmark}

\section{Experiments}\label{backpack::sec:experiments}
\input{sections/backpack_experiments}

\section{Conclusion}
\input{sections/backpack_conclusion}

%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "../thesis"
%%% End:
