\subsubsection{Abstract}

When engineers train deep learning models, they are very much ``flying blind''.
Commonly used methods for real-time training diagnostics, such as monitoring the
train/test loss, are limited. Assessing a net's training process solely through
these performance indicators is akin to debugging software without access to
internal states through a debugger. To address this, we present \cockpit, a
collection of instruments that enable a closer look into the inner workings of a
learning machine, and a more informative and meaningful status report for
practitioners. It facilitates the identification of learning phases and failure
modes, like ill-chosen hyperparameters. The instruments leverage novel
higher-order information about the gradient distribution and curvature, which
has only recently become efficiently accessible. We believe that such a
debugging tool, which we open-source for \pytorch, is valuable in
troubleshooting the training process. By revealing new insights, it also more
generally contributes to explainability and interpretability of deep nets.

\marginnote{%
  \begin{center}
    Code and experiments available at the Github repositories
    \href{https://github.com/f-dangel/cockpit}{\texttt{f-dangel/cockpit}},
    \href{https://github.com/f-dangel/cockpit-experiments}{\texttt{f-dangel/cockpit-experiments}}
  \end{center}
  \begin{center}
    \includegraphics[height = 0.8\linewidth]{../repos/cockpit/docs/source/_static/LogoSquare}
  \end{center}
}

\section{Introduction \& Motivation}\label{cockpit::sec:intro}
\input{sections/cockpit_introduction}

\section{\cockpittitle's Instruments}\label{cockpit::sec:instruments}
\input{sections/cockpit_instruments}

\section{Experiments}\label{cockpit::sec:experiments}
\input{sections/cockpit_experiments}

\section{Showcase}\label{cockpit::sec:showcase}
\input{sections/cockpit_showcase}

\section{Benchmark}\label{cockpit::sec:benchmark}
\input{sections/cockpit_benchmark}

\section{Conclusion}\label{cockpit::sec:conclusion}
\input{sections/cockpit_conclusion}

\section*{Acknowledgments}
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support by the European Research
Council through ERC StG Action 757275 / PANAMA; the DFG Cluster of Excellence
“Machine Learning - New Perspectives for Science”, EXC 2064/1, project number
390727645; the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) through
the Tübingen AI Center (FKZ: 01IS18039A); and funds from the Cyber Valley
Initiative of the Ministry for Science, Research and Arts of the State of
Baden-Württemberg. Moreover, the authors thank the International Max Planck
Research School for Intelligent Systems (IMPRS-IS) for supporting Felix Dangel
and Frank Schneider. Further, we are grateful to Agustinus Kristiadi, Alexandra
Gessner, Christian Fröhlich, Filip de Roos, Jonathan Wenger, Julia Grosse, Lukas
Tatzel, Marius Hobbhahn, and Nicholas Krämer for providing feedback to the
manuscript.

%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "../thesis"
%%% End:
