\subsubsection{Abstract}

We propose a modular extension of backpropagation for the computation of
block-diagonal approximations to various curvature matrices of the training
objective (in particular, the Hessian, generalized Gauss-Newton, and
positive-curvature Hessian). The approach reduces the otherwise tedious manual
derivation of these matrices into local modules, and is easy to integrate into
existing machine learning libraries. Moreover, we develop a compact notation
derived from matrix differential calculus. We outline different strategies
applicable to our method. They subsume recently-proposed block-diagonal
approximations as special cases, and are extended to convolutional neural
networks in this work.

\marginnote{
  \begin{center}
    Code and experiments available at the Github repository
    \href{https://github.com/f-dangel/hbp}{\texttt{f-dangel/hbp}}
  \end{center}
  \begin{center}
    \includegraphics[height=0.8\linewidth]{../repos/hbp-paper/doc/aistats_talk/logo/hbp_logo}
  \end{center}
}

\section{Introduction}
\input{sections/hbp_introduction}

\section{Notation}\label{hbp::sec:basicSetting}
\input{sections/hbp_setting}

\section{Modular Hessian Backpropagation}\label{hbp::sec:modularApproach}
\input{sections/hbp_modular_approach}

\subsection{Obtaining Different Curvature Matrices}\label{hbp::subsec:curvatureMatrices}
\input{sections/hbp_curvature}

\subsection{Batch Learning Approximations}\label{hbp::subsec:batchLearning}
\input{sections/hbp_batch_learning}

\section{Experiments \& Implementation}\label{hbp::sec:experiments}
\input{sections/hbp_experiments}

\section{Conclusion}
\input{sections/hbp_conclusion}

\section*{Acknowledgments}
The authors would like to thank Frederik Kunstner, Matthias Werner, Frank
Schneider, and Agustinus Kristiadi for their constructive feedback on the
manuscript, and gratefully acknowledge financial support by the European
Research Council through ERC StG Action 757275 / PANAMA; the DFG Cluster of
Excellence “Machine Learning - New Perspectives for Science”, EXC 2064/1,
project number 390727645; the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research
(BMBF) through the T\"ubingen AI Center (FKZ: 01IS18039A); and funds from the
Ministry of Science, Research and Arts of the State of Baden-W\"urttemberg.
F.\,D.\,is grateful to the International Max Planck Research School for
Intelligent Systems (IMPRS-IS) for support.

%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "../thesis"
%%% End:
